the New York Times publishes National
Security defense National Defense
information every day their unauthorized
disclosures all the time because that is
what journalists do good journalists at
least they publish if it's in the public
interest and with if you don't have that
ability then you basically do away with
any serious journalism uh full stop the
division line between public Citizen and
journalists has also come it become
extremely blurry if I go to the New York
Times and I read an article that has
been published without authorization and
I share it on Facebook to my relatively
numerous followers although that's not
necessarily relevant it could be with
even a family member am I now a
journalist who's disclosing State
secrets and the answer to that is by no
means clear because I'm certainly
publishing it and so that should make
people very concerned because each of us
is now a relatively powerful journalist
in our own right
[Music]
hello everyone
I'm here today
speaking with Stella Assange who is the
wife of Julian Paul Assange and I'm
going to start with his bio in a strange
twist since he at the moment can't speak
for himself and then I'm going to turn
to hers Julian Paul Assange is an
Australian editor publisher and activist
who founded WikiLeaks
in 2006
in 2010 Wikileaks published a series of
leaks provided by American Intel analyst
Chelsea Manning
and attracted widespread International
attention and outrage I would say in
early 2010 Manning who reported being
horrified by the behavior of then his
colleagues
to close three quarters of a million
classified and unclassified but
sensitive military slash diplomatic
documents to WikiLeaks an online news
site the US government then launched a
continuing criminal investigation into
WikiLeaks
in 2010
Assange
began to be pursued and I say began
because it went on for a very long time
began to be pursued by Swedish
authorities for alleged sexual
misconduct
uh episodes those charges were
eventually rescinded
UK authorities
operating as a consequence of the
Swedish call arranged a potential
extradition Assange at that point broke
bail which violated UK law and took
Refuge
in the Ecuadorian Embassy where he
remained under different conditions for
many years from 2010 to 2019 but was
finally arrested and returned to the UK
where
he has been imprisoned since in
belmarsha category a prison in London
he currently faces the possibility of
extradition to the U.S and possible
prosecution there on some 18 essentially
Espionage related charges
according to the Irish times recently
it's now a year and a half since Assange
completed his 50-week sentence
for jumping bail and this is where the
Julian Assange story gets even stranger
if possible
despite the fact that there are no new
charges against him in the UK he is
still in the category a prison belmarsh
where he has spent much of his time
in solitary confinement
in May 2019 Assange was brought up on 17
new charges relating to the U.S
Espionage Act of 1917 and They Carried
with them those charges a maximum
sentence of 170 years
the Obama Administration considered
charging Assange similarly previously
but decided not to given concern that it
might negatively affect investigative
journalism as such and could well be
unconstitutional
the New York Times
stated
that it and other news organizations
obtained and obtained documents in the
same fashion as Wikileaks and could not
see that Wikileaks Publications differed
legally from other journalists
publications of classified information
after assange's arrest and first
indictment the New York Times editorial
board wrote that quote the case of Mr
Assange who got his start as a computer
hacker I think this is a crucial uh
Insight here illuminates the conflict of
freedom and harm in the new technologies
and could help draw a sharp line
between legitimate journalism and
dangerous cyber crime
and that
the administration
has begun well by charging Mr Assange
with an indisputable crime but there's
always a risk with this Administration
one that labels the Free Press as quote
the enemy of the people that the
prosecution of Mr Assange
could become an assault on the First
Amendment and whistleblowers
as I said I'm talking today with his
wife
niece Stella Morris and was originally
Sarah Gonzalez and she changed her name
uh to try to maintain a certain
semblance of privacy in the midst of
this unbelievable chaos and complexity
Ms Morris was also assange's lawyer the
couple was married in 2022 although they
had established a long-term private
relationship during assange's extensive
time
in Ecuador
they had two sons during that period
Stella Assange was a 20 year old 28 year
old lawyer when she first met Julian in
2011.
interested in the work of WikiLeaks and
believing that the non-profit media
organization was shedding valid and
necessary light on unacceptable
corruption in crimes of War
she has said of her husband quote Julian
doesn't like people who are deceitful
he doesn't like opportunists and he can
be quite direct also people who are on
the autism spectrum uh Mr Assange has
been diagnosed with Asperger's Syndrome
don't score particularly high on the
agreeableness scale
both
Julian and his wife are Freedom of
Information Champions and had
experienced similar childhoods similar
parentage and similar extensive Mobility
and that gave them in something in
common in addition to their interest in
freedom of expression she completed a
degree in law and politics at soaz in
London her MSC at Oxford in Refugee law
and then a masters in Madrid in public
international law and so
welcome Stella it's very good of you to
sit and talk to me with me under these
conditions which must be incredibly
stressful I've I've really never
seen
someone in as complex and Tangled a web
as
your husband and you for that matter and
so that's really something because I've
met people who have been in very complex
webs and your situation is
um unbelievably extreme I was struck by
the New York Times comments on
and uh Proclamation that Julian was
really a test case for the
limitations on the journalistic front of
the new technologies that enable such
widespread disclosure of heretofore
hidden secrets I mean part of this I
would say is a consequence of just
magnitude of operation uh the Manning
leaks were 750 000 documents and of
course back in the days of mere print
and highly limited access to bandwidth
on the radio and TV front there isn't a
possibility that any journalist could
ever cause 750
000 Pages worth of trouble at once and
so I see at least in part that the
conundrum in relationship to your
husband is his whistleblowing proclivity
in combination with the mass scale of
the operation that computer technology
enables and so it looks to me like you
two are caught at the Nexus of what
radically new technology personality and
law
and so it's not precisely as is as if I
have sympathy for the fact that he's
been vilified and
prosecuted so assiduously but I can
understand the complexity of the
situation in some real sense that's
given rise to this so
the first thing I'm kind of curious
about if you if you don't mind is um
what elements of your husband's
situation would you like to highlight to
begin with I mean the most compelling to
me seems to me the fact obviously that
he's still in prison and under pretty
dire circumstances despite the fact that
in some sense the legal justification
for his sentencing has
well at least arguably expired and so
maybe you could fill everybody in on
that and then we can continue with the
conversation as it unfolds well I think
that Julian is and that he will
historically in in with time be seen in
this way is the foremost political
prison prisoner of the West he is a
Critic he is a dissident and he's also
an innovator what Julian did was he
brought his
um past background as a computer
programmer uh and computer security
expert
into journalism he understood before
anyone else
uh the architecture of internet
communication and how as journalism
moved on to the internet as emails were
being used to communicate with sources
and so on it was incredibly easy to
identify sources and that therefore any
meaningful investigative journalism
would be over and so he he took that he
also
um yes saw the opportunity of being able
to operate at scale and this is one of
WikiLeaks Chief achievements which is to
have basically become a library of
reliable truthful information records uh
and in that sense Wikileaks kind of
transcends uh traditional journalism
which was seen as a threat to the Legacy
Journal uh journalistic Outlets like the
New York Times and so on and I can go
back to that uh
editorial that you mentioned but uh
he did things differently and to a much
greater to achieve a much greater impact
and there's a diff there's another
aspect to this which is as a computer
programmer working on
um open source software and so on you're
used to collaborating with others
because if you're just going to work on
your software on your own you're
achieving a sub-optimal result and so he
brought the idea of collaboration into
the uh journalistic World which was
completely unheard of something you now
here with the Panama Panama papers and
so on a consortia of of news
organizations coming together to
go through these vast material that had
never been done before and Wikileaks
pioneered that and the and the first big
collaboration came in 2010 with the
Chelsea Manning Lakes which related to
the wars in Iraq Iraq and Afghanistan
the U.S State Department cables and the
Guantanamo Bay files and Chelsea Manning
also leaked the collateral murder video
which is perhaps what Wikileaks is most
famous for but the fact that Wikileaks
operates uh uh receives or has a
capacity to receive big data sets
anonymously from sources doesn't mean
that that's the only thing that
Wikileaks publishes and it doesn't mean
that Wikileaks publishes it Wholesale in
fact in part of the as part of the
extradition hearings there's been a lot
of
an expert well no uh witness testimony
people who are working with Julian at
the time of these 2010 Publications who
witnessed how Julian uh took steps and
perhaps and was uh the one with the who
was taking the most responsibility and
doing the most to redact those documents
and to put them out safely and to look
out for uh information that could
possibly harm a person in a sense of
physical harm or arbitrary detention
that that shouldn't happen
um but of course uh he was working and
Wikileaks was working in collaboration
with other uh news outlets and they had
other considerations for example the
guardian
um is concerned of about being sued by
oligarchs
um The New York Times
um had you know perhaps similar
considerations but these are uh major
players in the media with their own
relationships with Power Players so uh
Wikileaks impact and Julian's impact was
undeniable at the time he came onto the
stage as a and he was treated sort of as
a rock star and everyone knew who Julian
Assange was but most people wouldn't
know who the editor of the New York
Times is but in their
um in their world view they're far more
respectable and important than this uh
Australian newcomer who's who's changing
the rules of the game uh so there were
uh
anyway maybe I'm getting ahead of myself
but
um no no while you're outlining multiple
um what would you say points of
potential conflict of interest between
the various players let me push you on
that a little bit okay because this is
one of the things that uh popped into my
mind I always try to take both sides of
an argument let's say what I'm trying to
think it through and to try to make the
strongest case I can for both sides and
so I started I I would say I'm probably
temperamentally sympathetic to your
plight and also to Julian's plight and
so I also have to caution myself against
that to some degree
um because I'm not a fan of great
intrusive organizations whether they're
state or corporate but they still the
devil still has to be given as due when
when when operating at the scale of
Revelation that characterized WikiLeaks
so let's say the 750 000 documents that
were part and parcel of the
collaboration with Manning how is it
even impossible to be judicious in their
release because you could imagine
and if you have any objections to this
argument please let me know one argument
you could make is that
secrecy in and of itself is dangerous
and that it's the role of the media to
uncover and expose secrecy especially if
it hides potential malfeasance as
assiduously as possible and so the
proper role of an investigative
journalist is to Damn the Torpedoes and
steam Full Speed Ahead and reveal what
there is to be revealed and the counter
argument I suppose from the more
secretive militaristic side or the more
limited State interest side is well
that's all well and good but there are
circumstances under which
privacy and secrecy at least temporarity
is both strategically and ethically
necessary and in cautious behavior on
the part of journalists is very
difficult to discriminate between valid
from valid threats to National Security
and then you might say that the Legacy
Media when they're in their Heyday and
reliable which is not so obviously the
case now was composed of journalists who
were able to straddle that judicious
line revealing
inappropriately secret acts of
malfeasance when that was necessary but
not doing so in such a way that
compromised their ongoing relationships
let's say with the people who whose
Behavior they had to attend to and cover
and also not airing into the untested
Waters of destabilizing State security
then you ask yourself
well maybe that's true and maybe it
isn't and you can make an argument in
various directions there but if you
release the volume of documents that
Wikileaks releases is it even possible
to take the due care that might be
expected from or even demanded of
Legally by experienced journalists who
were operating at a more minor scale
hey guys producer Colton from the daily
wire here getting a good night's sleep
is one of the most important things you
can do for your health just like your
diet and exercise routine are unique to
your body's needs so are your sleeping
habits that's why Helix sleep provides
tailored mattresses based on your unique
sleep preferences the Helix lineup
includes 14 mattresses each design for
specific sleep positions and preferences
side sleeper models with memory foam
layers offer optimal pressure relief
stomach and back sleeper models feature
a more responsive foam to cradle and
support your body plus Helix mattresses
offer enhanced cooling features to keep
you from overheating at Night Don't
compromise on Comfort take the Helix
sleep quiz and find your perfect
mattress in under two minutes Helix
mattress ships straight to your door
free of charge try it for 100 nights
risk-free go to helixsleep.com Jordan
take the Helix sleep quiz and get up to
200 off your mattress order plus two
free pillows that's helixsleep.com
Jordan for 200 off all mattress orders
and two free pillows
foreign
well I think you you need to break it
down what were these uh 750 000
documents that were published so you had
90 000 I think from the Afghan war
Diaries and of those 15 000 were
withheld uh by Wikileaks precisely
because
um it was considered that they needed
further review the Iraq warlocks there
was a different approach uh which was to
have an automated
um uh uh what's it called reduction
and in fact there was I think an article
in wired there was criticism over the
redactions of the Iraq warlocks because
uh they said it was being over rejected
so one example was there had been a
document that had been obtained through
a Freedom of Information Act request and
uh from the Pentagon and that was
already out there and that this
this document that had been released to
a journalist was redacted but it was
less redacted than the version that
Wikileaks published then you have
um the um Guantanamo Bay files in that
case it was the uh the uh sorry the the
files of each of the of the detainees
who were in Guantanamo Bay until then no
one even knew who was there why they
were there how many were there and um
there was uh witness testimony in the
extradition hearing um from a lawyer who
represented one of these with Guantanamo
Bay detainees who said
um that it was through those files that
they were able to understand
what uh who the who had incriminated
them the person who had incriminated
their client was someone who had
confessed under torture and it was
through that that they were able to uh
then uh win their case so uh in relation
to the Guantanamo Bay files
um the telegraph for example published
the exact same data set uh in relation
to the Diplomatic tables it's uh
actually very interesting because
Wikileaks it's 250 000 cables Wikileaks
initially uh had a Consortium of five
big Publishers it was a guardian the New
York Times uh alpays in Spain the dirch
beagle and Le Monde in France
and these five big Publishers uh
did the initial stories with Wikileaks
but then they quickly just uh lost
interest and then Wikileaks then entered
into agreements with about a hundred
different media organizations around the
world because these Publications
concerned every single country in the
world
um and through uh sharing these
documents with newspapers uh in local
newspapers they were able to report
because you know
um The New York Times might not be that
interested in Burkina Faso but for the
people in Burkina Faso those State
Department cables were
you know part of their history but uh
also of of enormous uh potential impact
and that's what what journalism does
um and as part of their the agreement
with Wikileaks when a media organization
entered into an agreement with Wikileaks
uh there was a written agreement in
which they would review the cables and
so cables would be published as stories
were published and they would also
review that there was no one named who
would be at risk of arbitrary detention
or death
and so that was their uh their
obligation and they fed those reductions
to WikiLeaks who then published the
cable with reduction what happened with
the Diplomatic cables well the guardian
in its spiked towards uh Julian which we
can go into
um wrote a tell-all book in February
2011.
and in that book uh against its written
agreement with with uh Julian they
published the entire cable gate uh
encrypted file password that had been
entrusted to them uh and this is just
from a computer security perspective
this is absolute Madness it is just
almost a joke
um and they published it as a subheading
in their in their um
in the chapter and do you think they
knew what they were doing I mean they
claimed that they thought it was a
temporary code from what I've read and
do you do you think they understood what
they were doing they understood that
they were trying to uh to
undermine Julian in any every possible
way including by disclosing you know
whatever uh security measures that they
uh had uh were privy of privy to uh but
the uh
I think it was sheer stupidity uh and of
course they then tried to justify
themselves and they said oh uh he told
us it was a temporary password but
that's not even what the book says
in the book you know it says and Assange
told us this is the long password and
the long password is something like
um
a a record of diplomatic history from
1966 to the present day but the word
diplomatic was a word that should that
that they were not to write down they
should never write down and so in in the
uh in the book they even put the word
that you should never write down in
there uh so uh I think it was uh
carelessness it was also a race
uh to to getting their narrative out
because by then uh WikiLeaks
um Julian and the and the uh journalists
at the guardian that that were had been
working on these diplomatic tables I
mean all the by then
uh the guardian had all demanding leaks
so they had basically used Julian and
they didn't need him anymore and uh then
they turned on him and uh why why do you
so so one of the things that's popped
into my mind continually while I was
reading through the unbelievable trials
and catastrophes that your husband and
you have been through is something like
and I'm not claiming this is the case at
all I'm just saying what popped into my
mind
um and certainly this is an accusation
that's been leveled at me is that
someone in that much trouble must have
done something wrong and I would say
well probably that's true to some degree
because everybody has done something
wrong
um it's a very dangerous assumption
because given that each of us has
probably done something wrong that means
that we can be called out on it
arbitrarily and with Force when that's
in the interest of people whose
interests we've opposed and then also
the fact that that's the case that that
sort of Doubt can be elicited means that
people who are inclined to take you out
for whatever reason have an easy Pathway
to doing it and maybe that would bring
us to what happened in Sweden so it
wasn't very and and I have some personal
questions to ask you on that front and
and you're obviously welcome to not
answer any questions that I might pose
to you and I hope I don't do it rudely
and inappropriately but it wasn't long
after this vast Trove of documents was
published and you're now making a case
that they were actually published with a
fair bit of care and maybe even to a
lesser degree than they might have
validly been published it wasn't long
after that before the authorities in
Sweden brought charges against your
husband in relationship to sexual
misconduct that was in 2010. it's very
interesting to me that it was Sweden
your husband Julian described Sweden as
the Saudi Arabia of feminism which I
thought was a pretty nice phrase by the
way and there's definitely something to
be said about that and that was also at
the height or in the prodroma to the
believe all women and me too
um what would you call it brouhaha and
the insistence that
if any charges of sexual misbehavior
were ever brought against someone that
it was incumbent on everyone to assume
that the victim was telling the truth
and of course that violates the
presumption of innocence it often
violates your right to face your accuser
and it's Preposterous on the face of it
because what that does is enable anyone
who's manipulative or devious or
Psychopathic to use the entire weight of
the legal system as a weapon which is
happening so often now that it's almost
Beyond Comprehension and it seems a bit
too convenient in some real sense that
these charges emerged just at the time
that was most appropriate in some real
pragmatic sense for the authorities in
the UK and the U.S but I'd ask you also
more personally I mean you married this
man you had an affair with him for a
long time you have two children together
for some reason
you didn't
either you didn't believe the charges
and the allegations or you you saw
something in in Julian that superseded
them of
value and so
and this is a deeper question too I mean
you've got tangled in this pretty deeply
and you could have had a much simpler
life and so
why are you on his side why isn't it
reasonable just to assume that Julian
Assange is a narcissistic Troublemaker
with a proclivity for uh sexual
impropriety and uh why do you believe
that so deeply that well in some real
sense you were willing to stake your
whole life on it and why aren't you just
being played and I'm not saying that you
are but obviously those are the
questions that that all the people who
were launching allegations against your
husband and you those are the claims
that they're putting forward essentially
well Julian is the man I know uh the man
I married I know uh wouldn't do those
things and in fact the way he's
described is the opposite the exact
opposite of who he is
and that's not how I came into it to
this though I came into it uh in a
professional capacity
precisely in the context of these
Swedish allegations and I you made a
mistake which is a completely
understandable because uh you read
everywhere that Julian was charged but
in fact he was never charged there was
only ever a oh oh okay I'm sorry yeah it
was only ever a so-called preliminary
investigation and it was dropped on four
separate occasions uh the so why was
there an extradition order if it was
only a preliminary investigation right
and or is that exactly the issue no look
that is a very good question and in fact
Julian's case went all the way to the
Supreme Court he lost and the UK Supreme
Court said he should be extradited to
Sweden and then they said and we have to
change the law so this doesn't happen
again because you need a charge before
we extradite but it won't be
retrospective oh I see so they they
legislated but carved out a little
exception for Julian so he wouldn't
benefit from it and that has been the
norm again and again and again that
somehow Julian is treated as the
exception and then we're going to fix it
afterwards
um what were the allegations exactly
what what were the Swedish allegations
and how many people brought them forward
and why weren't they pursued so
according according there were two women
and according to their own account they
went to police because uh to the police
because they had found out that both of
them had slept with Julian over the
within a week and they wanted Julian to
have an HIV
that is their reason according to their
own account for going to the police and
you can go to the police in Sweden for
that reason well
um
who knows but just to put this in
context yeah okay okay so Julian had
just published the Iraq warlocks sorry
the Afghan war logs in July 25th of July
I think it was or so
um the Swedish preliminary investigation
was opened on the 20th of August
but in between that even before he went
to Sweden there was an article in The
Daily Beast which said that the U.S
state Department was telling its allies
to find a way to stop Julian in his in
his tracks and to find a way to
prosecute him and they knew that Julian
still had to publish the Afghan warlocks
and the Diplomatic tables
um the sorry the Iraq War logs the Iraq
War logs were published in October and
the Diplomatic cables on the 29th of
November Sweden issued its uh its
Interpol arrest warrant on the 30th of
November one day later Julian uh
voluntarily went to the police uh
station and was lost his Liberty uh on
the 7th of December 2010 he was put in
prison for 10 days then he was under
house arrest for a year and a half he
was in the embassy for seven years then
he was arrested and he's been in
belmarsh high security prison ever since
so well so the women wanted him to
undergo an HIV test
um
but those that's still not allegation of
misbehavior
what well although who knows in Sweden
what were the specific allegations and
you said the allegations were dropped
before formal charges were brought on
four separate occasions so what were the
allegations so there are four
allegations three in relation to one
woman and one in relation to the other
the the single allegation which was most
serious is what they called uh lesser
rape
uh so there are three degrees of rape in
Sweden and there this was the the lesser
degree in the sense that there was no
physical uh coercion
and the allegation is that uh Julian
initiated sex when the woman was asleep
um
the Swedish police had text messages
from the women which they refused to
hand over to the defense
and those text messages exonerated
Julian and his lawyers his defense
lawyers were able to read them at the
police station but were not allowed to
take a copy and Julian would only be
able to access those text messages once
he was charged so you have this uh he
was placed deliberately placed in this
uh position of complete disadvantage in
relation to his own defense because at
no point during those nine years where
Sweden was opening and closing the
preliminary investigation was he
formally an accused person because once
you're accused you start getting all
these uh the the rights of a defendant
and it never reached that point and uh
because there was no case so the the uh
there was an initial prosecutor who
okayed
um the the suspicions uh then three days
later the the senior Suite prosecutor of
Stockholm reviewed uh the allegation
this most serious the more serious
allegation which is so-called lesser
rape sorry I forgot to mention the other
ones were assault and sexual coercion in
relation to the other woman
um
but uh and the prosecutor said I have
reviewed the interview with women
with the woman in relation to this uh
so-called lesser rape
um
there is nothing uh
that is not credible about uh the
account but there's nothing in the
account that is a criminal offense that
was the most senior prosecutor in Sweden
what happened then there was a
politician this was about 10 days out of
the Swedish general election a
politician for the Social Democrat Party
who had been active in the who had held
the role of
um gender
ombudsman
who was also an attorney then took on
the two women as his clients and
contacted a separate
um
Prosecutors office they kind of take
test cases based in Gothenburg and he
pitched this case to the senior
prosecutor there and then she took it up
her name was Marianne and throughout
that period that Maria knee was heading
up the case
she refused to question Julian now
imagine this a sexual assault a sexual
assault lesser rape and so on case where
the chief investigator who was a
prosecutor refuses to question Julian
and since uh
we've learned a lot of things since
we've learned the content of those text
messages where the woman
um with the with the more serious charge
sorry not charge even I say it you see
it's so it's yeah insane right right
it's so pernicious
um yeah
she says uh I don't want to accuse
Julian of anything uh the police are
trying to grab him
um and I I'm being railroaded this was
in her contemporaneous text message
which well how how was it how was it
that that both of these charges were
brought about simultaneously because
that also you said it well yes it's like
what's going on here because I presume
these women didn't know each other I
mean maybe I'm wrong but and so you
think well what it seems a bit too
fortuitous that both of these events
happened at the same time and then so
soon after the other string of events
that you described so obviously you know
there's a bit of smoke there and of
course we're also debating whether or
not there's fire where there's smoke so
that's that's a difficult problem but
what's your understanding of how it is
that both of these charges emerge
simultaneously charges
you know they they didn't know each
other they met on one occasion they knew
that
the second woman contacted the first one
and then they spoke to each other and
they found out they had both slept with
Julian and then they both went that's
their story that they went to the police
because they wanted an HIV test because
he had slept with them in this uh I
don't I don't
I don't see any point in me speculating
about
that you know
um what I I can speak to is the
extraordinary Behavior by the Swedish
authorities
in conjunction with the British
authorities so since uh well could you
speculate about the motivation of the of
the second Swedish agent so to speak who
took on the two women as clients and who
had a political stake in the issue what
exactly was she up to and why and why
didn't she want a question it was a man
it was a man his name was Claus oh sorry
and it was a close call in that general
election in Sweden and he was tipped to
be the new Justice Minister if they won
the case I mean if they won the election
sorry and incidentally
um one of the two women was also running
for politics so uh in that same election
for for a local seat
um and she actually
um
there are text messages as well between
the women where they're talking about
um that they can get money if they tell
their story and stuff so it's a little
bit uh yeah so there's lots of moral
hazard involved in many different
directions so let me summarize the story
so far and you tell me if if I've got it
essentially correct so Wikileaks is
founded there's a treasure Trove of
documents published let's say exposing
the secrets of many powerful agencies
and people who might have wanted those
secrets to be kept silent
coincidentally at the same time as the
publication occurs on a scale that's
heretofore impossible technically there
are allegations brought about against
your husband in Sweden which is the
capital let's say of the ideology that
makes such allegations possible at a
time that's extremely fortuitous for the
people who
um whose interests are threatened by the
leaks and whose interests are also
further personally and politically by
the fact of the allegations in Sweden
itself and then despite the fact that no
charges are brought against your husband
the UK justice system decides that he
should be validly extradited even though
they recognize simultaneously that the
fact that that is a legal necessity is a
violation of a more fundamental legal
principle which they decide not to
enforce in the singular case of your
husband and then as a consequence he
jumps bail and heads for the Ecuadorian
Embassy and then
do you think that decision was
justifiable to jump bail let's say and
why did he do it and then why of all
places the Ecuadorian Embassy
um well why the Ecuadorian Embassy it
was because Ecuador at the time had
taken a very um
sort of independent uh Sovereign
position vis-a-vis the United States so
the United States had had its biggest
um Naval Base I think in in Ecuador in
in the world well in at least in Latin
America uh in Ecuador and they had
kicked out the U.S base and also had a
very kind of uh
uh it's proud uh position they said well
you can have our your base here if we
can have our base in Miami
um so they were they were changing the
rules of the geopolitical game and
um so this
ballsy attitude of uh the president at
the time Rafael Correa uh suggested that
they would they would uh be willing to
protect Julian and Julian went into into
the embassy on the 19th of June 2012.
and uh he had exhausted all his uh
domestic remedies in the United Kingdom
the United Kingdom was giving uh just a
few days uh before he would he would be
taken off to Sweden in Sweden you have
an extraordinary
um pre-trial detention
um regime so it would make he would be
in prison from the moment he arrived in
in Sweden even though he wasn't charged
and interestingly because Sweden is is
very interesting country and they they
kind of play the stats so I think I
don't know if it's still true now but
for example they have very low uh or at
least they did a few years ago
um one of the the shortest sentence
times
um for convicted prisoners uh
and that was partly explained because
they also had the longest pre-trial
detention time so that by the time they
were convicted they had already served
um
you know their their their potential
sentence uh so Julian would be going
into a Swedish prison
in a country where he didn't speak the
language but most importantly
uh Sweden had
renditioned two Asylum Seekers this is
one of the most uh egregious cases of of
extraordinary extraordinary rendition
um in which two Asylum Seekers were
taken on a CIA flight in Sweden were
handed over by Swedish authorities uh to
the CIA where they were flown to Egypt
which was their country of origin and
they were tortured and then eventually
they were able to take their cases to
the human rights committee of the United
Nations and they won and the uh also the
the
um torture committee uh found in their
favor and said that the that Sweden had
violated its obligations not to hand
over a person to the country
um that where they they risk being
tortured or killed
um so and on top of that of all the
extradition cases uh that had gone uh
before from the year 2000
Sweden had
extradited every single person that the
EOS had asked for so the U Sweden was in
uh you know
Sweden has this self-image and it also
has amazing Marketing in the world it
has uh uh you know this this image of
fairness and so on and you spoke to
swedes and they'd say oh well if he came
here of course we would you know it
would be Unthinkable but what I've come
to learn with Julian is that
the unthinkable becomes reality when it
comes to him he is he is it seems to
happen all the time well they create
this he is an exception to the rule but
what's actually happening is that
they're creating a new rule with his
exception
um that will then that is then
normalized so it if you look at the the
persecution that has occurred against
Julian over time now you see a lot of no
platforming by PayPal for example of uh
people with platforms that are critical
of for example the war on Ukraine or
whatever
um
PayPal and Bank of America and visa and
MasterCard for the very first time in
2010 created a banking blockade against
Wikileaks they blocked Wikileaks from
receiving donations from
um from people who wanted to donate
because Wikileaks was you know on a
global scale this great new phenomenon
and Wikileaks is always just that's an
appalling Leaf that's a appallingly
fascist president and it started
reflected recently in Canada with the
government's decision there to seize the
bank accounts oh on the entire Financial
operations of anyone who they deemed
inappropriate in relationship to their
donations to the trucker Convoy which
was for very much a tempest in a teapot
yes it was it was the most utterly
appalling thing that are absolutely
utterly appalling prime minister has
ever done and that's really saying
something because he's a real piece of
work and so yeah this this collusion of
corporate Enterprise and government in
relationship to personal finance and the
funding of let's say political or
journalistic causes is an unbelievably
dire threat and so okay so Julian
presumed that if he went to Sweden to
face these allegations which were of
insufficient
magnitude and credibility to result in
formal charges that the consequence of
that would be his immediate imprisonment
for an indeterminate amount of time and
the overwhelming probability of being
extradited to the U.S now we might say
uh you made a case for why that was a
credible concern and also for a case why
Ecuador was willing to protect him
um
why were the Americans after him and
to what degree again we have the mystery
here right which is well
Assange is operating on a scale that's
novel and you said yourself that's a
consequence of the novel
interpenetration of his radically
Advanced computer programming skills and
the international Horizon of Journalism
that that instantly opens up that he
pioneered and the danger for him of
course is that well when you're
uncovering everyone's secrets you can
make an awful lot of enemies and the
probability that at least one set of
those enemies is going to successfully
take you out especially giving given
that they're operating with immense
resources is extremely high and he is
also a test case and an exception and
almost necessarily so because what he's
doing has never been done before and so
it's not surprising it produces legal
conundrums all right so the swedes go
after him on spacious grounds attempting
to denigrate his reputation there's
moral hazard involved on behalf of the
accusers both politically and personally
and at the same time there's a
pronounced threat lurking in the U.S now
the Americans were ambivalent about this
as I read in the bio because the Obama
administration had thought about
Prosecuting or at least charging
um Julian but had decided against it
because they thought it would violate it
would pose a threat to the Integrity of
the press and violate the constitution
which seems like a relevant issue here
but the charges were eventually brought
forth nonetheless and it also seems
interestingly enough that it didn't
really matter whether the Democrats or
the Republicans were in charge the
Americans at the highest level of State
Authority were highly inclined to make
life very difficult for your husband
practically and legally and to prosecute
them in some sense to the fullest extent
of the law and so
seven first there was a first charge
that had to do with uh password cracking
or sharing if I have got that right but
then there were 17 more charges
developed and so you have another
situation there where a reasonable and
uninformed outside Observer might say
well good God you know the UK is after
him the swedes are after him the
Americans are after him and not just on
one charge on 18 charges and these
charges carry with them I think a
maximum Life's a maximum sentence of 170
years and so there just has to be
something here lurking under the surface
that's just not Kosher and so tell me
what the Americans are
are claiming and also why even in the
face of those claims which are
repetitive and constant and being
pursued for a very long time why you're
on board with his defense both ethic
well ethically practically and
personally so what are the charges what
are the Americans allocating alleging
okay so uh yes the Obama Administration
decided not to charge Julian but they
they only decided that
um in 2013 Julian had already been in
the embassy for a year
uh and as part of the when they
announced that they weren't going to
charge him over the Manning leagues
um they did it through a spokesperson
called Matthew Miller and he said uh as
you said that they weren't willing to
charge him because uh there was no way
to differentiate uh what Julian and
Wikileaks had done even
with the same Publications
um
and what the guardian the telegraph the
New York Times and so on had also done
um and then Matthew Miller also said
Julian Assange is not a hacker he's a
publisher
so they had by then all the evidence
because Chelsea Manning had just been
through her court marshall and all the
evidence had been presented at the court
martial and
um
and so they you know they had the the
full information they took a position
and at the end of his presidency Obama
also commuted Chelsea Manning sentence
so that was a political position of the
Obama Administration what happened well
the charges the charge the single charge
um initial that was initially brought
was brought in 2018.
and that was brought in the context of
what we've since learned uh was an a
complete Obsession by the CIA into uh
Julian and Wikileaks so as soon as Trump
entered in office Wikileaks
um after a month or two
published what it called Vault 7 which
was about it was uh Han books about the
uh
the
cia's hacking uh unit
which uh
disclose things like their capabilities
of
um you know using exploits using
um Android phones or iPhones and using
the the vulnerabilities in those
um in those uh
phones and computers in order to access
them and take over the the computer and
the US government a few years before had
committed to if it found a vulnerability
to let the the companies know so that
they could be fixed because their
security risks which anyone can really
take uh exploit
um and it also revealed for example that
the US that the CIA had the capacity to
also control cars imagine how uh
undetectable assassinations can take
place in that context so the CIA was
livid and
um and
in last last year there was an
investigative piece published by three
investigative journalists National
Security journalists based in DC uh and
they had over 30 sources within the
National Security establishment in the
U.S uh and they were
uh
people in the CIA and then also uh named
sources so imagine 30.
and they spoke to these
investigative journalists about what had
happened during the Trump era
and they disclosed that there were plans
um not just to kidnap and rendition
Julian but also to assassinate him and
one of the conundrums that the justice
department faced
um or that the administration faced was
that there were no charges against
Julian and so what do they do if they
kidnap him yeah you might call that a
conundrum right
um they kidnap him they take him to a
black site oh hold on well there are no
charges against him well we better uh
conjure up some charges so they they uh
then uh brought a charge in I think it's
March 2018 which was this single
computer charge now this single computer
charge is uh not even a
what they allege is that there was a
online chat between Chelsea Manning and
someone who they say is Julian but they
can't prove
um
in which Chelsea Manning says
I have a hash which is not a CR a
password a hash
um
I have half a hash can you
help me uh
anyway it's not about
it's not a password I'm not a technical
person but basically
the purpose according to the US the
purpose of
eventually cracking the password there
was no attempt to crack the password and
it was Chelsea Manning asking for help
um and which didn't result in an attempt
uh
the purpose was so that Chelsea Manning
could log in with a different login in
order to hide her identity it wasn't to
access this is the US's case it wasn't
to access information because she
already had access to all that
information in fact she had access to
top secret information which she didn't
leak but they're saying that Julian
or someone they say is Julian agreed to
try to help her hide her identity which
is what journalists do all the time
advise sources about how to stay safe
from detection that is their big
um their big uh computer crime charge
now just to put things in context okay
so that was the first charge yep sure go
ahead that is a five-year charge Julian
faces 175 years and they use that charge
as a PR exercise in order to say oh look
he's different from journalists because
there is this computer charge and it's
uh you know when the the New York Times
almost gleefully saying well you know
he's been charged but not for something
uh that that would affect us that was
before they introduced the 17 charges
under the Espionage Act but they
fundamentally misunderstood
um the computer charge but I think they
didn't even care because it was just a
way of putting a wedge between
themselves and uh Wikileaks But after
those 17 charges were introduced uh
under the Espionage Act this was about a
month after Julian was arrested
um he then your times put out another
editorial in which they said that the
case against Julian Assange strikes at
the heart of the First Amendment The
Washington Post has also put one out and
in fact all the you know the Press
Freedom groups the human rights groups
they're all on this sorry they're all on
the same side in relation to uh that the
case should be dropped and it's in a
complete outrage
right well it looks to me it well it
looks to me like
there's a fair bit of pragmatic
strategic thinking going on here which
is
well
you could make a case that assange's
activities partly because they're so
novel and so International and and on
such a large scale raise a variety of
security concerns and legal issues and
that's Troublesome to many powerful
players and why wouldn't they attempt to
tangle him up as much as possible in as
many legal webs as possible in some
sense regardless of whether or not that
would ever result in conviction because
he could easily be dragged as he has
been through an incredibly brutal
self-defense process that in all
likelihood would take at minimum a
decade and at maximum longer than that
and so you can imagine strategically
that there's almost no risk at all to
the people who are bringing forward
these charges because they can parcel
out the duties of keeping your husband
in a spider's web for the rest of his
life without any risk to themselves
whatsoever
and so it seems to be almost inevitable
that this would occur as a consequence
again of the scale and at which he was
operating and the novelty of the
environment that he had produced and I'm
not trying to justify it in the least
but I'm trying again to put myself in
the position of those who are bringing
about the allegations what's the cost to
them well some government money is going
to be spent some people are going to be
specializing in his prosecution that's
not much of a cost the cost to you and
Julian is your your whole life in some
real sense but they bear virtually none
of the weight of this and have managed
or have they have they managed in some
sense to successfully impede the
operation of Wikipedia or have they in
fact as a consequence of this
prosecution brought even more attention
to Wikipedia
operations and made it more sorry sorry
Wikileaks operation and made it even
more successful and widely known than
would have otherwise been so I'm curious
do you think that their actions are
counterproductive even in relationship
to their own goals
I think their actions are
counterproductive but in the sense that
I don't it isn't cost free to them to do
what they're doing
um they have to corrupt their own
Norm system in a very public way yeah
but that's a long-term problem man
that's a long-term problem you know and
and lots of organizations are facing
that problem now I mean I see that again
in the actions of the Canadian
government I mean what they've done is
absolutely reprehensible
speaking in the medium and long term but
from a short-term instrumental
perspective then
you know hypothetically the advantages
outweigh the disadvantages
so and you know shallow actors act
shallowly and so
um I agree that well let's make the case
for example that the New York Times is
correct and that these investigations
constitute a real threat to the
Integrity of the press I mean obviously
that's a catastrophe because the Press
is one thing that keeps the potential
overreach and tyranny of the government
and big business and their collusion at
Bay and if you interfere with that then
you risk destabilizing the entire
Society so how obviously that's a risk
well my point was more that the persons
involved in this do not bear anywhere
near the same risk or cost that you and
and and uh and and and Julian bear
they're not in the same league I mean
they can do this professionally in some
sense while you're roasted over a slow
fire
professionally personally financially
with regard to reputation socially uh
and then there's also a fair bit of a
genuine mortal risk
in play you know I've met probably now
150 people who've been
tarred and feathered
by various Bad actors Who Bore very
little consequence for their tarring and
Feathering and every single one of them
including people who I would have
regarded as some of the most Brave and
emotionally stable people I've ever met
and I've met a lot of people have
reacted to that pillering and social
exclusion and appalling mobbing
with about the same degree of severity
from the psychological perspective that
they might have experienced had they
been diagnosed or a close one to them
diagnosed with a fatal illness
and one of the things that I did uncover
more as I was investigating your
situation and your husband's situation
is that
your team has made the claim that
Mr assange's mental health has been
severely compromised and I find that
highly probable virtually everyone that
I've talked to has been through a tiny
fraction of what you guys have been
through has some variant of
post-traumatic stress disorder as a
consequence you know and that might only
be uh you know only be a university
Professor who's faced three or four
allegations of some kind of ideological
impropriety in the student press and a
local newspaper and maybe a peripheral
article on a state or national level and
then the what would you say the
developing mistrust of his peers that
goes on for a couple of months compared
to what you guys have been through
that's a tempest in a teapot but that's
enough to really really bring harm to
people and it's part of an indication of
just how serious this culture of
unwarranted accusation and weaponization
of the investigative process really is
and people people who are listening
might think well who cares you know this
is Julian Assange what's the probability
that something like that will happen to
me or anyone I care about and I would
say
the way things are going
the probability that that
may happen to you is increasing
dramatically but even more particularly
the fact that it's happening to many
people and extremely publicly is already
making you muzzle your willingness to
speak freely and act truly in a manner
that's so pernicious and pervasive that
you can hardly even imagine it and so
for every one person that's persecuted
successfully on the reputational front
like your husband there's probably ten
thousand people who decide that it's
probably just better to shut up and take
it and that really does pose a signal
threat to the Integrity of the state
that's predicated on free association
and free expression so it's rather
appalling to to say the least and so
um let's go through the other if you can
to some degree the other charges
obviously they're of less significance
than the original charge I would think
because otherwise the original charge
wouldn't have been the charge that was
originally laid but what are their
accusations have emerged and why do
Legacy news media sources like the New
York Times regard those charges as also
a threat to their operations well
actually the the the first charge the
the computer
um conspiracy to commit computer
intrusion it's called that is the the
weakest the you know the it is a
basically a made-up charge uh and
because technically what they were from
a technical perspective what they said
was
supposed to be the goal is a technical
impossibility but that came out during
the extradition hearings and what they
did in relation to this first I'm still
talking about the computer charge
um was they they introduced a second
superseding indictment halfway through
the extradition hearing so the U.S has
been moving the goal posts constantly
and with this uh second superseding
indictment
um they said that they had they
basically relied on a uh new witness
their key witness who was an Icelandic
man who they they made
um
he had been flown to Virginia it
um given his uh testimony to the to the
grand jury and so they had produced this
um second superseding indictment
and in there there they didn't introduce
more charges they just said look we have
more circumstantial evidence that uh
suggests that that says that
um uh Julian allegedly was
um instructing uh hackers okay so all
this new stuff that they introduced in
the second second Super seating
indictment relying on this testimony
from this Islamic man sigured Earth
orderson
body
a year later
um in 2020 sorry 2021
this very same Witness
then spoke to Icelandic the Icelandic
press and said no
what's in that second superseding
indictment is not what I told the FBI
and in fact it misrepresents what I said
so basically the the Department of
Justice has completely misled
um the British courts uh and and the
witness on which on whom they relied has
retracted the the well what they say is
his testimony uh so that's been out
there for you know anyway so that's that
because it's such a weak charge they
needed to try to Beef It Up and then
they went to this man who's also
um uh convicted uh fraudster and uh
and a convicted pedophile and so on and
and also uh diagnosed
um with uh
psychopathy or what is the less yeah
anyway well what how that's not such a
bad combination fraudster pedophile
psychopath why wouldn't you regard him
he's incredible the thing the way things
are especially because he was convicted
of some of that yes well he has
defrauded Wikileaks and uh Wikileaks had
had taken him to court and he had been
in prison so it's not like he didn't
have a you know a motivation there
either
um and they gave him
um immunity from prosecution
and uh
anyway so that's the one charge now that
the the 17 charges under the Espionage
Act now there's quite a lot of interest
in the Espionage Act but
Julian is
um
he's not there's no allegation he's a
spy per se
um the the U.S says that he uh received
information that concerns National
Security
um and he possessed that information and
he made he communicated that information
to the public those are the 17 charges
if you break it down it's 40 uh four
charges equivalent to about 40 years a
potential sentence for the publication
of of the collateral murder video
five charges in relation to the state
department cables which amount to 50
years
and the Iraq War logs and so on uh and
the Afghan warlocks
um constitute the rest but this is what
they're he's not being prosecuted
they're really throwing they're really
throwing the book at them in some sense
I mean they have so much
they have access to so many things that
he published
that I just can't imagine a court case
that is addressing this because there's
so much for the prosecution to draw on
given the volume of the leaks that they
could bring allegations of it's not the
volume okay going out the volume they
have an issue is it is okay volume it is
the fact that the information is
National Defense information they say so
it could be just one doctor right I
guess I was just wondering if right
right but but if you have 750 000
documents to choose from so to speak you
could imagine that it could take you a
very long time in court to wander
through all of that and find the one
document that might be cons that might
constitute a smoking they don't even I'm
just thinking about you guys being
tangled up no but they don't even need
to
show it they just need to say this was
classified he published it it is a like
a strict liability offense and because
it's an Espionage Act so it was enacted
originally to prosecute spies or at
least it purported to do so but it was
it was worded very broadly
um and very vaguely because this was
enacted in 1917 and it was immediately
used
um to put uh dissidents uh uh critics of
the U.S participation in the first world
war in prison include including Eugene
Debs and uh so it was immediately
repurposed okay but then for many years
it was used to prosecute spies and if
you're Prosecuting spies you don't give
them a defense you don't give them a
public interest defense because it's
four spies right there's no public
interest defense for a spy who's giving
a document to South Africa for example
uh
but if you then use the same statute and
use it against someone who's involved in
journalistic activity who is publishing
the information and you say no you have
no public def uh public uh interest
defense because this is an Espionage
statute so this is one of the big
arguments that we are using in the
extradition so is this why the is this
why the New York Times is concerned
because the the line between journalism
and Espionage is being well let's say
blurred in a major way oh the New York
Times what's their concern they've been
concerned about this for 50 years
because the U.S government under Nixon
tried to use uh the Espionage Act
um in relation to the Pentagon papers
and at that point
um they decided against it but
constitutional lawyers have been warning
since then that one day there will come
a U.S Administration that will be
willing to read the statute in a way
that you can prosecute a publisher and
the New York Times is concerned because
the activity that they describe as
criminal which is receiving information
from a source and possessing imagine
just possessing information even if you
don't publish it
these are all independent independently
um uh charges uh that stand on their own
just possessing National Security uh
National Defense information it is
worded so broadly that even in the
extradition hearing uh one of the expert
Witnesses is a constitutional lawyer
said well even reading National Defense
information is a violation of the
Espionage Act because that's how broadly
it's worded and now it's finally been
used against a publisher for the very
first time and of course that sets a
precedent okay okay so you can see why
the New York Times is concerned okay so
there's 17 charges of this sort which is
also going to be of broad concern to
like Publishers even those operating at
a lower scale so just out of curiosity
well not just because it's it's not
minimal
why did you guys decide it would be
easier in some sense not just to go to
the U.S and slog this through in court
because it's not like the pathway that
has opened up before you
seems to be to be much
easier or preferable I mean your
husband's in prison and not a very good
prison not that there are very good
prisons and he's suffering immensely as
a consequence and he's in limbo and
appears to me to be likely to remain
there for as long a time as it's
convenient and possible for people to
hold him there I'm wondering
why would it be worse necessarily to
accept the extradition
to go to the U.S voluntarily and to
to raise money for the defense and to
fight this out in court I'm sure you
thought this through in great detail but
it isn't self-evident to me given that
you're I mean you're really between a
rock and a hard place but it isn't clear
to me that you've you've picked the
softer rock well it is it is the less
bad
solution
um all Julian is doing is is fighting
using the law to fight against what is a
political persecution and the only
opportunity is going to have to make
that argument is in the British courts
because once he comes to the United
States he won't be able to argue why he
published what his he published the fact
that there no harm has come of it
um he will he will go into a Virginia
Court which is
um in close proximity to CIA
headquarters the the same CIA that that
plotted to assassinate him under the
Trump Administration uh you know this is
this is the United the United States
that has been
breaking the law in order to get their
hands on Julian and
um and they have total control over him
you're right the the prison situation in
belmarsh is is bad it's very bad I mean
uh you know during the covet period it
was extremely difficult for him and he's
uh
his his
mental health has uh at times been in a
very uh fragile state uh as it would
for anyone who was in isolation like
that but not just isolation the sheer
Injustice of of this case uh also well
and the uncertainty yeah that that's a
terrible thing I mean once you're
sentenced in some real sense at least
you have
it's like the hammer has fallen you know
and it's it's it's better in many ways
to have the hammer fall than to be
waiting for an indeterminate Hammer to
fall forever that's that's a that's an
almost unbearable psychological
condition to be in
um there were indications for example
among the gay population in San
Francisco at the height of the AIDS
epidemic that peoples uh some people's
mental health actually improved after
they were diagnosed with AIDS because
the uncertainty about whether their
behavior was going to result in AIDS had
been resolved and so the the Fatal
catastrophe had arrived and its
actuality was better than its
um uncertain prediction and that's an
extreme case but the psychological
literatures replete with that sort of
example and your husband's in the
terrible situation where he faces
indeterminate punishment for
indeterminate reasons for an
indeterminate period of time and so but
again I want to ask a bit more because
I'm still I'm still confused you haven't
had a tremendous amount of success in
the English courts
um and your husband is in prison even
though by all appearances
he shouldn't be
um
given that his sentence has already been
served and that the initial
transgression was of a relatively minor
sort given the circumstances I would say
I don't I still don't exactly understand
why you have more distrust of the
American court system than you do of the
English court system are you concerned
that that his that his life will be in
danger in some more real sense than it
already is given what's happening to him
in the UK oh it's a combination of of uh
fears I don't have
uh tremendous faith in the justice
system
uh full stop
um not in the UK and and not in the
United States this case is as political
As It Gets and
um
quite aside from that the if Julian's
extradited
um he maybe well he will be this is a
national security case what do they do
with National Security defendants while
they isolate them and uh there are many
ways of putting a person in solitary
confinement in the U.S they've perfected
that uh that on any given day uh they're
about 80 000 people in some form of
solitary confinement and uh then they
have a reserve a special form of
solitary confinement which is the most
extreme one it's called special
administrative measures and there are
about 50 people in the whole of the
United States that are placed under
special administrative measures
um there's also the federal
um super max prison adx Florence where
Julian is likely to be taken now you you
don't these these uh potential uh Sams
or adx Florence
um that's that's something that
initially stopped uh the UK courts from
ordering the extradition in fact in
January uh last year uh the the lowest
Court ruled that Julian should not be
extradited because if he is extradited
um he will be most likely placed in
conditions that will drive him to take
his own life and the the extradition
hearing hurt heard multiple
uh experts who had assessed Julian and
all reach the conclusion that he was at
high risk of of
um taking his own life he would if he
was placed in uh isolation like that uh
why is he surviving in belmarsh well
because he can see me and the kids and
we're able to speak over the phone Sam's
special administrative measures uh
doesn't even allow contact with other
prisoners or prison guards and you have
maybe 15 or 30 minutes a month in which
you can choose to speak to your family
or your lawyer
these are the most extreme that's there
and and who decides you've made a very
credible case for why you're concerned I
understand but who decides whether
you're placed under yourself the the uh
the agencies the CIA and so on so right
right and that happens before the trial
yes that happens at uh at any stage
so for example uh the the alleged source
of Vault 7 Joshua Schulte he's been
under Sam's uh for years now and
um there's there are articles about the
conditions he he's in a completely
horrific uh and he's had to prepare his
case from there but quite aside from
that there are two other
you know
enormously significant reasons which is
Julian can't mount a defense
he's you know he's a foreigner he's an
Australian who was publishing in the UK
um has no connection to the United
States and they want to pluck him and
put him in on trial in the United States
to face 175 years they say you have no
public interest defense and then another
thing that they've said is that while we
may argue that because he's a foreign
National he does not enjoy First
Amendment rights I mean what is that if
you're going to apply your criminal laws
extraterritorially and then you bring
this Foreigner to your to your Shores
and then say well you don't have
uh First Amendment you don't enjoy
constitutional rights because you were
Foreigner abroad
um it's complete right that's convenient
well it's basically Guantanamo Bay you
see with the with the war on terror
right they changed the rules they said
there are these exceptions you have to
carve these exceptions where we're not
well we're kind of breaking
international law but but uh we have
this little way of doing it and so one
of the main arguments for not putting
the Guantanamo Bay detainees on trial in
the United States is because then you
kind of import
um that system of exception onto U.S
jurisdiction I mean that's that's kind
of in the background I see and so you
think that's what's happening in the
case of your husband is that an
extension of the Guantanamo Bay
bureaucratic morass into American
territory itself and thus establishing
also a very bad president you said that
he has been denied a public interest
defense and is that a consequence of the
nature of the charges is it is it such
that if you're charged under the
Espionage Act specifically you may have
explained this to me already and I may
have missed it if you're charged under
the Espionage Act specifically are you
then denied Prima fascia a public
interest defense which you would have if
you were a journalist
no it's not the there's no there's no
definition of of who's a journalist the
only uh the only factor that is taken
into account is whether you received
possessed and communicated that
information
and because you're being I tried under
that there's no exception for journalism
there's no exception for journalists and
okay um
uh debate over the Espionage Act and its
constitutionality has been there from
the beginning for over a hundred years
uh and some people say that the the
whole statute is a violation of the of
the Constitution but it's never been
used right well so that's also why
that's also why people I would say on a
personal level in the in the United
States in particular but maybe around
the world should also be concerned about
what's happening to your husband because
of course the situation with any uh with
any reasonable legal tradition is that
once a president has been established
which it would be in the case of your
husband it can be indefinitely broadly
applied to any number of actors and so
obviously the New York Times And The
Washington Post are perspicacious enough
to see that threat being levied against
them but
that isn't necessarily where it would
stop right and that's particularly
worrisome in in a case like we have in
the modern world where
I mean so for example
as a Canadian if if your husband is
convicted let's say eventually or even
given that he's being charged if I go to
wiki leaks and I download one of the
documents that he's charged with
promulgating illegally am I now as
egregious a violator of that statute as
he is because I can't see how I wouldn't
be
well according to the statute yeah but
that's you don't have to limit it to
WikiLeaks the New York Times publishes
National Security defense National
Defense information every day their
unauthorized disclosures all the time
because that is what journalists do
um good journalists at least at least
they publish if it's in the public
interest and with if you don't have that
ability then you basically do away with
any serious journalism uh full stop well
it's it's worse it's worse than that now
I would say because the the division
line between public Citizen and
journalist has also come it become
extremely blurry so for example if I go
to the New York Times and I read an
article that has been published without
authorization and I share it on Facebook
to my
relatively numerous followers although
that's not necessarily relevant it could
be with even a family member am I now a
journalist who's disclosing State
secrets and the answer to that is by no
means clear because I'm certainly
publishing it
and obviously everybody in some real
sense has become their own Publishing
House in a line of in in a world of
radically accessible social media and so
that should make people very concerned
because each of us is now a relatively
powerful journalist in our own right
so whatever happens to journalists is
very much likely to to be able to happen
to the rest of us
yeah I mean a tweet is a is a
publication there there's court rules
now uh that that are
um
already uh creating uh precedent and
uh of course you know it goes to the
very fact of our ability to be able to
express ourselves as well because these
plot platforms are the new Public Square
right but we don't we don't understand
that Public Square we don't see uh what
rules are are and what you know
political considerations are governing
that square and so we're uh at the mercy
and we don't know how to police it
either we don't know how to police the
scripture we can't even see we can't
even see the whole square right because
we don't even
enter into into contact with you know
some people in the other part of the
square that there's some invisible wall
between us uh where we can't see each
other's arguments and we're also
interacting with agents whose
motivations and identity not only do we
not understand but we can't understand
and that would be the case with
Anonymous actors but even more the case
with Bots and so
the policing issue becomes
extraordinarily difficult and I suppose
that's part of the conundrum that you
and your husband face too because
the legal system paranoid though it may
be and and reactionary though it may be
is also trying to wrestle with the fact
of the radically increased journalistic
ability of the typical Citizen and
exemplified obviously in the case of
your husband because he's such a
powerful user of this technology and so
so what do you think people who are
listening to this podcast should
conclude with regards to what they think
and how they configure their actions and
is there anything they could do
that you would regard as ethical and
useful
in relationship to what you're going
through
well I think
the first thing is is to understand that
Julian is the
locus of
a
Battleground over narrative over who he
is what he's done what his motivations
are what Wikileaks is
and essentially Wikileaks is what he
calls a rebel Library of Alexandria uh
the publications of WikiLeaks have been
used in court cases
um they've you know led to uh uh someone
who was a victim of CIA rendition being
able to win his case against
um Albania
and it's also revealed how
States behave in a criminal manner uh
when when the stakes are high enough and
when the when you're at a kind of power
top tier power level what I mean by that
is for example the state department
cables revealed that the U.S state
Department was interfering with the
investigations into criminal activities
by CIA agents in Germany in relation to
the abduction torture of a German
citizen called kalidal masri in relation
to an investigation that was initiated
in Spain
in really where a Spanish journalists
had been deliberately killed by U.S
forces in Baghdad so there was an
investigation there and and similarly in
in Italy and so the U.S state Department
used its influence its political power
to Strongarm those countries into
dropping those investigations
or to Simply investigate but never we're
actually issue an extradition request or
so on so when when we come to this level
of power
there are no rules the Only Rule is is
is
how much you know might
overwrite and that's that's that might
that has descended on Julian and tried
to uh
create a climate of
um
of a persecutory climate around his
person uh in the lead up to his arrest
there was a Relentless amount of
fabricated stories uh the guardian
published on the front page of its uh
well on the top of its website but also
the front page of its newspaper a
completely fabricated story claiming
that Donald Trump's uh not the guardian
that's hard that's so hard to believe
yeah they hardly ever publish anything
that's inflammatory and false well you
know what
um anyways the uh
the woman a decade can hit who
interviewed she's fun well interestingly
um she had also done a hit piece on
Julian so you have that in common
in 2012 she oh yeah yeah she did there's
a lovely point of contact she did a uh
an interview with Julian about a book he
had written called Cypher punks
um freedom and the future of the
internet
and it's a very interesting book because
it was written a year before Snowden
published his Publications and it
anticipates a lot of what snowden's
Publications then revealed
um and she did with the uh
the pretext was that it was going to be
a book review but really it was a it was
a hit piece yeah she's very good at
pretexts by the way
uh real pro at pretext she was she was a
butter won't melt in your mouth lovely
polite English woman who had nothing but
the best intentions and who we helped
set up her
um technical production because she
couldn't quite handle it herself and who
was all smiles and cheer until she
actually let her poison tongue loose and
so she was quite the creature as far as
I was concerned so it's lovely to know
that he my husband your husband and I
have that in common do you know do you
know about the the British diplomats
historically they're called they were
known because of
um that that character and a a
term to be used to use uh for for
the the British is perfidious Albion
I don't know if you're right right right
right yeah so yeah so I'm familiar with
that I hadn't I hadn't applied that's
great that's great uh uh I I see the
relevance of that
um epithet more clearly now that you've
explained it but and a lot of these
characters that were used as character
assassins against Julian
um they're recurring uh you know the for
example the one who wrote a piece
um
he was he was he was the uh supposed to
be the ghost writer for Julian's
autobiography and the the publisher went
rogue because they anticipated that
Julian would be extradited within weeks
and they decided to publish a draft of
the autobiography uh without his
permission under the title the
unauthorized autobiography and that
autobiography has many many mistakes for
example it says that uh
uh Julian's father is an actor
um and and they made up quotes and then
those quotes then got published as if
Julian had said them anyway that just
the uh
um so that that ghost writer then went
on to Once Julian's utility to him had
expired
um
also because there was another potential
book deal that fell apart in relation to
Snowden and
um
and so this this author then went and
wrote this absolutely poisonous uh piece
against Julian and
that same author do you remember the
grenfell fire in London where this Tower
block of Apartments a terrible tragedy
that happened in 2017 uh where the tower
block burned down and it was down to the
clotting of the building uh that the
council had had
and put on the building anyway this this
same guy
um oh Hagan is his surname he was then
he then wrote a profile about the
people who had been living in that
apartment block and
um I think 78 people died
and he he basically exonerated the the
council the authorities uh and and
put the blame on the victims and when I
read that I thought well of course you
know these are these are people who are
in that business of
um
of sucking up to power basically and if
you have a state
or a a section of the state that
sets its sight on an individual or a
group of people then you get all these
opportunists who uh or people who are
sucking up to the state for their own
reason or seeing a career advantage in
uh in writing that train and so for
Julian uh London which is quite a
specific uh
um okay London is is a is a strange city
it is a Cutthroat and especially the
journalistic uh world it is very I have
a voice I haven't noticed that at all
yeah it is it is you know Elite uh I I
forget the percentages but
um the vast the the the percentage of of
Oxbridge of Oxford and Cambridge
graduates in working in the British
media you know the top tier media is is
hugely disproportionate when you compare
it to other professional professional
jobs
um and it is vicious and so Julian
entered that sphere and then they have
all this uh kind of a slipstream of
actors uh in in the media and in the you
know in the whatever
um book deals and so on and Julian kind
of entered into that
whole environment
um you know as a as a as an outsider who
created a radical Outsider there was a
lot of jealousy there was a failure to
understand him because Julian is you
mentioned he's he's uh on this autism
spectrum he is he is uh brilliant
brilliant and uh incredibly engaging and
all these things he is such a
uh an incredible
character and he has a lot of charisma
you make the case for a radical
transparency of the press and that's
certainly a case that I'm inclined in
many ways to agree with a priori and
perhaps also in the case of your husband
more specifically you also make the case
that he's done a lot of good
I I would but I would like to ask you
two questions
what harm if any
in relationship to that good do you
think Wikileaks and your husband has
done
um given the magnitude of his operation
and the technical technological novelty
of this form of Journalism what are the
moral hazards let's say real and
possible and why have you decided to be
so radically on his side
despite the fact that while he has a
wealth of powerful enemies he has a very
diverse range of powerful enemies many
many accusations have been levied
against him you know you might think
well a sensible woman would think
um
I could find an easier life
I could find an easier life somewhere
else and so but you've made the decision
to dive into this in the deepest
possible way and so the first issue is
what's the harm that Wikileaks is
promoting if any
that needs to be considered in relation
to the good and the second is why do you
trust this man given that he's at the
center of this absolutely in some sense
unprecedented level of controversy
well I can't answer the question the
first question because it is completely
abstract now the U.S government had uh
talking points when Wikileaks first
started publishing the
um Manning leaks and uh they completely
reversed the the true situation so for
example Wikileaks had just published
um the the existence of fifteen thousand
uh
victims civilians who had been killed
that had been completely unacknowledged
and uh what did they do they reversed it
to say Wikileaks has blood on its hand
and when the U.S has been
um
under Oaths in the court martial of
Chelsea Manning and after afterwards in
the extradition hearing they have had to
admit that they have no evidence to back
the claim
um so you know uh the fact is that
Wikileaks operates at scale
um and that has uh risks of course but
it has also
uncovered war crimes uh torture yeah
well I guess well part of what runs
through my mind I guess is the
proposition that
we have a right to free speech because
such things in some sense can't be
decided at the level of particular
detail it has to be something like
it's the journalists right and
responsibility to make what might want
to be kept secret available and then I
suppose it's the responsibility and
obligation of people who are working in
the more narrow domain of State security
to try to maintain their barriers but
there's going to be a beneficial
antagonism between the two let's say
because it's hard to get that exactly
right and it's not appropriate for the
State security agents even though they
have their domain to interfere with the
overarching freedom of expression and
the Free Press and your case as far as I
can tell in Julian's case basically
hinges on the proposition that what he
is most fundamentally is a journalist
and that what he's doing although it's
at scale in a new technological platform
is indistinguishable from what
journalists should do that's moral and
appropriate
and that the fact that he's being
persecuted on multiple fronts
simultaneously some clearly more
egregious than others does in fact pose
a threat to the Integrity of that
freedom of expression in such a manner
that everyone should be concerned about
it does that seem an appropriate
summation yes I think that's fair I
think it's also fair to say that that he
he goes
um
he goes beyond journalism in the sense
that uh not he but Wikileaks as it
basically has a a uh is a repository for
our contemporaneous history right right
and that is also there's a people
there's a library of Alexander yeah
there's a people's right to know their
own history the truth of the history
um and uh and you know there are victims
who were never even recognized because
that that's truth is suppressed uh
because of who controls the information
he's not he's not a he's not a
transparency Max like uh sorry
fundamentalist he is a transparency
maximalist he's not against
um reductions he has engaged in
redactions
um with the material but he he has
he has a an attachment to the historical
record and the importance that it
transcends each smaller interests and
the interests of of smaller actors and
journalists have that
um
principle should hold that principle out
there at its highest well you made a
strong case for his judiciousness in the
release and that was quite surprising to
me given the scale of his releases and
so maybe if you don't mind we could end
with more personal question which is
why do you trust this man
well because I know him well okay so
tell tell me I mean this is a genuine
question it's not a it's not an
artificial closer I mean you're in a
tricky situation I mean you're you're
dealing with a man who's buys by your
own account very charismatic and very
powerful technically and in terms of
reputation and he has a lot of enemies
and a lot of allegations against him any
one of which could easily taint his
reputation
permanently and yet you've decided not
only to support him let's say
professionally but also to lock your
life
into his life when you at least in
principle had other options and you say
you know him what is it about him that
has compelled you and you should have
some wisdom you've been a lawyer you're
well educated you should have some sense
of how the world works you shouldn't be
someone
over whose eyes the wool is particularly
easily pulled and you've come to this
decision and you made a public case for
it you've paid a price for it why what's
compelled you to believe that he's who
he claims to be
well because
I've known him since 2011 and this is
also my life this isn't just why do you
uh you know attach yourself to him it's
the same thing and I entered into uh
contact with Julian uh in initially uh
you know professionally I observed what
was happening to him and what what how
the world around him
um populated by
not well-meaning people who sometimes
had no interest but sometimes times
well-meaning people who had an interest
and that in fact he was quite a in a in
a very vulnerable uh position being high
profile uh as as he was and actually an
extremely vulnerable political position
because his Liberty depended on his
political capital and that's what was
targeted and I saw all these lies being
constructed around him and uh observed
how in a sense uh the the
surroundings like the people around us
or the the Press which I previously had
trusted to it you know as as a normal
person was malicious and maliciously
representing him maliciously
representing reality and so it's not
like I could just choose to take their
side because they're wrong you know
because because it was being it was
deliberate and it was I could witness
the persecution as a bystander bystander
and as then as an also as an implicated
party
um and you know the incredible political
we wanted to live our relationship
and have a family and even that was a
kind of a political act not because we
were trying to make a political act but
because we wanted to live our lives and
so
um together okay so your case in large
part is uh if I've got it right is that
you're not in some sense merely seeing
this through Julian's eyes and you're
not merely an advocate for his point of
view you've been around and in the
trenches long enough and so it's 11
years now that you've seen the
malfeasance and spiteful accusations
first hand and you've seen the facts
behind that firsthand within the
confines of your own experience and so
your experience happens to dovetail with
that of your husband but you've been
able to draw your own conclusions
independent of whatever sway your
emotional attachment to him might also
exert that seem reasonable I've lived
this yes I've lived this and the CIA has
plotted to kill him and they also
instructed people to take the DNA of our
six-month-old baby's nappy it's just
they followed my mother there's there's
just no there's not even a choice in in
the matter because it's uh every
single aspect of Our Lives has been
intruded on and it's not just Julian
it's it's it's me it's our son it's his
lawyers it's but more uh more broadly
what they're doing to Julian is
corrupting uh our uh Western liberal
democracy as we
as we as the ideal is I'm not saying
that it's ever been that
um but it's a fundamental corruption and
uh and a uh a a step into a a
categorically different reality
well that's an excellent
um
summation to end on as far as I'm
concerned and uh my condolences in some
sense
on your situation I have some
idea about
what you're going through not least
because of observing the consequences of
I suppose the similarities between what
I've experienced and what your husband
has experienced which he certainly has
had the worst of it I would say but I've
also watched the effect of that on her
and uh you know that's not a pleasant
thing to witness by any stretch the
imagination and I hope that you are
capable the two of you of
of holding it together and maintaining
your wise counsel and level heads and
finding your way through this awful maze
without being Tangled Up in the spider's
web so terribly that the
that the spider comes and devours so
good luck to you and thank you very much
for talking to me today